---
number: 6
title: Constraining the state and variability of the paleo-Atlantic
peeps:
  - David Thornalley
  - Alice Carter-Champion
  - Daniel Parkes
  - Zhiyi Jiang
  - Jack Wharton
collaborators:
  - Paula Moffaz-Sanchez
#github: cmip6moap/project06
#video_time: 378
#video_thumbnail: project06
---

We have developed high quality geochemical and sedimentological records examining past variability in the deep circulation of the North Atlantic. Our work using traditional [foraminiferal oxygen](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/875666/7) and [carbon stable isotope](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/900233/13) analysis has provided vital constraints on past circulation changes that are used as a benchmark for changes in the northern North Atlantic during the end of the last Ice Age. Moreover, by applying newer proxies (i.e. benthic foraminiferal [Mg/Ca](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/875665/7) and [radiocarbon](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/1208455/1) measurements) at high resolution to this much studied time interval, we have shown that the circulation of the North Atlantic was more variable and complex than previously expected. David & Alice are taking these concepts further and are [exploring the temporal and spatial complexity of the Younger Dryas and its impact on the circum-North Atlantic cryosphere](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/1832763/1), using high-resolution marine inorganic and organic geochemical proxies, faunal assemblage analysis, and terrestrial archives. Additionally, by applying benthic foraminiferal Mg/Ca ratios, radiocarbon measurements and novel clumped isotope paleothermometry, we were able to explore the characteristics of the glacial deep Arctic Mediterranean and reveal that, following a stagnated glacial state, it likely released heat during the deglaciation that may have helped melt surrounding sea-ice and marine terminating glaciers. This [work](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/1046697/3) presented a fundamentally different view on the past circulation of this climatically sensitive region of the Earth. 

Our cutting-edge research using paired Mg/Ca-δ18O analysis of multiple species of planktonic foraminifera also enabled us to demonstrate large amplitude Holocene variability in the temperature and salinity of the subpolar North Atlantic. [This work was the first paleo study](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/875667/7) to draw attention to the importance of subpolar gyre (SPG) dynamics in millennial-scale climate change, including the suggestion of a climate stabilizing feedback mechanism during the Holocene ; the role of the SPG in past North Atlantic circulation changes is now a widely recognized mechanism. [Follow-up work](https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/publication/935116/7) to examine centennial scale variability during the late Holocene which revealed how solar forcing caused coupled changes in atmosphere and ocean circulation.

[//]: # (There are many outstanding questions regarding both glacial and interglacial Atlantic circulation. There is uncertainty and conflicting evidence both from proxy and model studies about whether the glacial AMOC was substantially shallower than modern, and if it was stronger or weaker. Using NERC, NSF and Leverhulme awarded funding I have undertaken major research developing depth transects of grain size records at numerous locations along the DWBC in the N and S Atlantic to examine how it altered during the LGM and across DO events of MIS3 (51,68). Much of this work is still in its final stages, but consistent with my findings from MIS5-4 (68), I am finding that substantial changes in the flow speed depth structure of the DWBC were coupled to climate state. However, by implementing our calibration of the SS proxy (54), my results suggest that there was little change in the overall strength of the DWBC between glacial and interglacial conditions or across glacial abrupt climate events, consistent with findings from past seawater neodymium isotope reconstructions that I have been involved with (48). Regarding interglacial climate, a key question is the magnitude and cause of past climate variability. As Co-I on the major new NERC VARING project (with Prof Tzedakis, UCL) and on a separate project with my PhD student Daniel Parkes, I will constrain the variability of the surface ocean (examining the SPG) and major deep-sea AMOC components during a range of interglacial intervals, to examine the likely causes of abrupt climate events, and to test the hypothesis that circum-North Atlantic climate during warmer interglacial conditions is more variable and caused by AMOC instability – with important implications for a future warmer climate state)

